and we're playing a game that's a
balance between
staying in the house
and wrecking the economy or coming out
of the house
and uh and basically killing more people
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr david sinclair he's
an acclaimed harvard professor and
researcher who has taken on the task of
synthesizing as much of the scientific
data coming out surrounding covid19 as
humanly possible he also researched and
wrote about pandemics in his
groundbreaking book lifespan and was
named by time magazine as one of the
most influential people on the planet
and while he is very careful to point
out that he is not a medical doctor his
analysis of the current crisis is being
shared far and wide and uh that is where
i want to start so
help us begin to tease out fact from
fiction man i think that would really
help people hey tom well there's a lot
of uh a lot of misinformation for every
one fact there's another 10
uh you know bs stories out there
what first thing would be
this is not a this is not a
hoax it's real this is not a fire drill
is anybody still calling this a hoax
well i think on twitter that there's a
lot of crazies out there saying that
this is uh not as bad as it as everyone
says it is it is as bad as everyone says
so i want to get into the weeds a little
bit just because i find this
the nature of a virus to be something
that i don't think i fully understand i
don't think a lot of people fully
understand
so
uh to start i want to start with what i
think is the craziest thing that i've
heard on this topic
but it's being shared by people that i
consider really intelligent
because people can sound so credible so
the craziest thing that i've heard on
kobit 19 is that it is created by
5g and
so and and i was like uh that sounds
crazy to me and the
um the person was like no no you got to
watch this video and they say it so
compellingly but i was like ah this
doesn't sound right
it's not i've watched probably some of
the same videos uh it's complete crap
actually please don't believe it i mean
first of all we're getting much more
radiation naturally than 5g is giving
any cell
um
plus
the the that's not a good correlation
you know you could say oh
you know the bats are breathing so
breathing causes this you know
there's a lot of correlations you can
draw so it's it's not from a wuhan lab
either
uh it's not from a snake it's almost
certainly from a bat
maybe through a pangolin the spiny
anteater um but we can trace this it's
it's simple science we can read normal
geneticist i can read the dna
of the virus i can see that so i want to
get into that
so one i've heard you say that before so
i want to understand what is a virus and
what would human fingerprints on a
manufactured virus look like
so let's start with what are viruses the
virus is
a sub-life form it doesn't have all the
components to live but it's got enough
instructions that once it's inside it
another species cell it can instruct
that cell to make more copies of itself
and break out um and it's evolved over
you know potentially 450 million years
these coronaviruses have been around for
a very long time infecting dinosaurs and
infecting
all the mammals on planet so these are
ancient
formidable foes but they actually have
one weakness which is
their envelope
so i've said that you shouldn't think of
the virus like a cannonball because you
most people draw it like this cannonball
it's actually more like a bubble that
you can pop and that's why washing your
hands is so simple soap will kill this
thing now what's on the outside is uh
little proteins that make it prickly
it's called the spike protein and that
spike
is what engages with our throat and our
lung cells and once it engages it tricks
the cell into taking it inside the cell
like a trojan horse would all right so i
wanna i wanna go step by step so i
i've often wondered okay if this thing
gets on me can it wiggle like do they
locomote or is it like if it hits my
cheek is it going to crawl into my eye
or is it only going to get there if i
put my finger in my eye like how does it
work
yeah if it gets into your uh on your
face
uh the only way it's going to get into
your body is if you move it there
and that's because the skin has dead
cells and so it can't it can't like
penetrate the layer of dead cells to get
to living tissue correct correct so we
have keratinized dead cells and these
cannot be penetrated by the virus even
if they were to get into one of these
cells they're not going to
re respawn because those dead cells are
not going to make more copies it has to
be
a
currently surviving living dividing
healthy cell
and so the only way to get that is
either your eye your nose a mouth or
some other orifice
the way to think of this somebody
described it as you know when you get um
what's a glitter glitter sticks to
everything and it stays you'll have
glitter on you that's what the virus is
like
interesting okay so that's a little
scary is it as immobile as a piece of
glitter meaning it will only move if i
move it
correct but but that doesn't mean if it
lands on the back of your throat it's
going to stay there right over a period
of a few days it's going to get washed
down
slowly and spread down if you're unlucky
into your lungs
but it's not going to walk there it's
going to be carried
by the
fluid in your throat
that's interesting so i always assume
that what was happening was it was
actually getting into my bloodstream is
it not doing that it gets into a what
i'll call a topical cell you probably
have a much better name for it but
something right on the surface it's
getting into that cell it's dividing and
then
does is the virus somehow still also in
a position where it can be brushed down
lower
yeah right so these are epithelial cells
in our lungs um
and we also have endothelial cells which
are in our blood vessels and all of
these types of these both these type of
cells have a lot of the uh the lock that
spiked protein key inserts into so
they're the most susceptible
but can it get into the blood absolutely
can get into the blood
but it's easier to just wash down into
your lungs than to go via your
bloodstream but once it's in your
bloodstream
and that seems to happen
to a majority of patients you'll
actually find that it can inflame your
gut
and your heart particularly
and that's that's pretty scary because
if it gets to your heart
especially if you're elderly that's when
it can cause
uh well potentially lethal problems
so going back to what the virus actually
is
um is it is a it's a strand of rna
well as genetic material is rna which is
a really ancient form
of genetic material and rna is is very
similar to dna except it's typically
single stranded it's one piece of a
molecule whereas our dna
forms as a double helix like a zipper
most people have heard of the double
helixes it's two but what that means is
that if rna copying makes an error
and this is happening pretty often in
this virus
it's locked in and it just accumulates
an error after an error and we're seeing
it mutate every few days across the
planet and we're getting new strains we
have 20 different types across the
planet now now fortunately
these changes
uh even though they're locked in they
they're not all in
the most dangerous genes
actually the most dangerous gene is the
one that
encodes the protein codes for the
protein that's on surface because
remember that's the one if it changes
too much it could render vaccines
ineffective or even come back to get us
after we're immune
meaning you're you're only immune to one
type
well you know think about the flu
you get immunity to the flu but it can
come back in different forms because
it's changed enough that our bodies
don't recognize it and there's a chance
albeit small that it will change enough
over the next 12 to 18 months
to be different look different enough to
the immune system
and that spike protein
right now only has one from
from the wuhan strain and there's a new
one that's taking
actually taking over in the u.s and
europe but unfortunately that's only one
change
i estimate that you need probably five
or more changes for it to really be a
concern
so i'll ask why are you optimistic then
isn't this something that's likely to be
problematic cyclically every year
uh well it it's probably going to be
cyclical probably not every year but
these viruses exist in the animal world
the same way the flu exists in in birds
and that's where it comes from every
year so what we're seeing is every
five to ten years coronaviruses come out
of the animal kingdom and get us
and it could be that right you know
right now the
virus is mutating in bats it's mutating
in pangolins probably
and other species so we're we're in a
world now where we're so so up against
nature
that
it's inevitable that we'll come back
whether or not this current
strain that's that started in china is
going to keep going around the globe for
a few years i'm doubtful because it's
not mutating so fast that it's probably
going to happen
but then again we've never had
a pandemic where billions of people have
had this unstable virus go through the
population and every person is an
experiment right you you it's mutating
inside your body and if it hits the
right
the right genetic combination where it's
either more infectious or it's more
lethal
you can spread that
yeah
yeah so all right let's stay on this
point for a minute because i want to
make sure that i really understand so um
the common cold the common cold is
mutating and that's why i keep getting
it over and over or are there a hundred
different things that seem like the
common cold and i just keep getting each
unique one
so the common cold
is either a rhinovirus usually
or in some cases a different type of
coronavirus and those are
coming out of the animal world too
they're not continually circling the
globe in humans they do die down over
summer and then
will come out in a different form from
the animal world
that's really interesting okay so um
common cold has a few variations it's
re-emerging uh via some sort of mutation
process in animals so we get it in this
yearly cycle but it's really a yearly
cycle born of our interaction with
animals uh
now we have this strand that's it's
mutating faster it's
really sneaky in its way if you've got
four to five days roughly where you may
not show any symptoms but you're highly
contagious super genius if you're a
virus great strategy it's not so lethal
like ebola that it burns out so now it's
you know going to keep going for a while
so my question is
how are we going to get rid of this is
is the only way to get rid of this that
it will truly die off due to changes in
in temperature and humidity
like the like influence
yeah it's unfortunate that
this is worse than influenza with the
flu it dies out after a cycle through
the northern and southern hemisphere
it eventually we get enough immunity to
this
that uh it doesn't survive and the same
thing is going to happen
exactly
uh but that there's only two outcomes in
in this world scenario
either we all
or enough of us get it so it's roughly
50 of us have gotten it
and that's going to be terrible because
you know how many at least half a
percent of the people maybe a percent
will die
or the vaccine arrives in time to
prevent all of that
and we're playing a game that's a
balance between
staying in the house
and wrecking the economy or coming out
of the house
and uh and basically killing more people
and it looks like you know either of
those options
is not gonna work for the for the world
so we're gonna have to do this dance in
the middle ground of hunkering down
going out behaving differently and
perhaps hunkering down later in the year
if it comes back like it might be doing
in china or it's early days but you know
that's what you need to watch if you
want to see our future pay attention to
china
okay what i'm trying to wrap my head
around is
we are so we've got herd
immunity which enough people get sick
you now have the antibodies you're now
fine but you've got a disease that is
mutating so insanely quickly because
like the more i hear about this i am a
way optimistic dude even on this um
but it's making me go
could this be
infectious enough mutate quickly enough
have the delayed reaction enough that it
doesn't
go away
i hope you hope that's not the case i
mean it's not a zero chance it's just
slight chance
but it's scary enough to at least be
talking about it and paying attention to
what
is coming out of labs that are
looking at the genetic sequence of the
of the samples
there have been at least a thousand
viruses sequenced right now it's
sequencing is the term for reading their
genetic code
and there are there are a lot of changes
that are going on but right now most of
them
are just in places in the virus that
make no difference
and only one that concerns me
we should definitely pay attention
because think about this tom
the the vaccine is being developed using
the original
uh strain from
the chinese that
came out of wuhan back in early january
but the vaccines are now getting out of
date right we already have
viruses that are already different than
the original strain and like you say
they're evolving and becoming more
distant from the original one so the
vaccine makers
you know are behind the times already a
little bit but i'm still optimistic that
it's not going to change so much that
the vaccines will be rendered
ineffective but they might be similar to
the flu in the sense that they won't
work as well and they won't be 100
effective
yeah how the cat and mouse game will be
played with the vaccines is is really
interesting and this is an area where it
really starts to get super optimistic
not just what you were talking about
before where it's like hey we've shown
there's a really robust response in mice
but something you've talked about before
which is for the first time ever in
human history the entire planet is
focused on one thing um
talk to me a little bit about that talk
to me about the way data is being shared
um and and some things that give you
cause for hope
yeah well one of the big thing that
things that's happened to us as
scientists is
we're normally fighting we're all
normally we're trying to show who's the
smartest person in the room
what's what's that's our job basically
to prove how smart we are it's a bit of
a sick profession but what i've seen is
people are not worrying about that
anymore and forming chat groups
and using apps to all come together so i
study aging normally in human health
especially with chronic diseases
and also infectious diseases somewhat
these students of mine as well as others
in this field have come together
it's called the aging research community
and they're giving each other talks
every few days you get another talk from
either a student or a phd um or a
professor and that never happened before
and what's great about that is i'm
certain that this kind of an attitude
will be continued even after this all
goes away and we're learning to come
together actually being forced to learn
how to come together uh in these very
competitive fields
the most people that i see 95 of us
are really coming together in a way i
haven't seen ever before and if you just
look at the
amount of
effort that's going to finding
treatments and vaccines
we're in up to 55 drugs being tested
around the world
immediately that could help us within
the next few months these are drugs
typically that are on the market already
for other things and the vaccine were
about 40
uh global tests so this is
something i've never seen and the fda in
america
you know usually they're so slow in
improving things
they've changed their attitude they're
looking at uh drugs such as
hydroxychloroquine or known as plaquenil
and
i think most of us have heard about that
how that was
at least published by a couple of
japanese papers that it could help with
covert 19 symptoms
even though it's not proven to work the
fda
last week approved its use
in hospitals
now that would never have happened
before they would have said show us
phase 2 phase three or at least a lot of
evidence that it would work but there
are proving things without 100 percent
evidence that they actually work which i
think is great because they're finally
balancing risk reward and when the risk
super high right now people are dying
they're saying okay this drug is pretty
safe it's not going to do damage doctors
you're allowed to use it
yeah that that is probably the most
interesting thing to come out of this is
um just to see everybody rally around
something um i know when you were
talking to peter diamandis he was saying
you know i always thought it was going
to be an alien invasion or something
like that an asteroid impact that would
get the whole world to come together so
man i wouldn't wish this on any of us
obviously but the fact that people are
responding in a beautiful way there's so
much heroism with people on the front
lines and going into hospitals and it's
really cool to see
yeah well let me just say a few words
about
how predictable this was
um
it to us biologists it was certainly not
going to be an asteroid it was
99.9 going to be a virus and probably a
coronavirus
the experts were were telling us you
know it wasn't just bill gates right it
was virologists i saw a wonderful ted
talk in 2010
by a guy that discovered coronaviruses
and bats in asia and he said
this is where it's probably going to
start and that was you know 10 years ago
and so this has been coming even in my
book
i lifespan i talk about becoming
pandemic and how we have to get rid
ready for it because if we're going to
extend our lifespans there's no point
doing that
if a virus is going to knock 10 years
off our average lifespan
um so this was coming and we should have
been much more ready for this and when
we're all said and done we have to be
much more ready for the next one because
it's not a question of if it's when
um and just today i was reading up about
a virus that
i recall came out of australia
um you may or may not have seen the news
it's actually we've had a whole bunch of
outbreaks uh nine at current count
on the east coast of australia these are
bat viruses
uh it's called
henro viruses i believe
and what they what happens is the bats
give it to horses and then the horse
owners catch it
and this is also a lethal disease that
also gets up in the brain and can cause
dizziness a coma and death
and these have been coming out every few
years
fortunately the animals the horses have
a vaccine so that's one way to do it if
it's in domestic animals you can
vaccinate the animals
with bats it's obviously harder because
they're wild animals but we can do a
couple of things one thing that the
chinese government did that was great
which should help
is they banned
the trade of wild animals now so you
can't go
buy bats at a market you can't get
pangolins and snakes so that but it's a
bit late they did that in february after
the horse had bolted so to speak
and the second thing you can do is
monitor the environment you can to see
are these viruses mutating
and test if they grow in human cells and
we knew from bats that if you took the
bat coronavirus or one of them and put
it on human cells
um the same ones that are in our throat
they would multiply so we knew this was
coming it was just a matter of time so
those are the things to do and one of
the things that i'm proud of is a group
that i've been working with and i
co-founded a company called arcbio and
they've developed uh pretty rapid tests
to be able to monitor the environment
and people for what viruses they have in
their body they make kits that detect
the genome of pathogens and it doesn't
have to just be a virus it can be
anything that's in the human body or an
animal and they have a database of all
known pathogens in humans so what they
do is they read the genetic material
that's in your bloodstream or in your
nose
they take out all human dna because
that's not as interesting
and they look for what's left behind and
they can see
any type of virus any bacteria any
fungus and then say okay
that's what you've got it's version 8 of
the coronavirus or it's a bacterium
that's brand new and this is how we
think you should kill it and that's
being sold to hospitals right now
interesting and is there a way like do
they have the data now
where they could be used as a covid19
test
yes yes and this is another heartwarming
story just another example of
american ingenuity they stopped working
on everything else and everyone
still working because they're essential
to uh
to healthcare they're all working on a
rapid covert 19 test um it actually was
pretty easy to convert the test all it
was was a tweet to the software and they
were ready
so
then is this something like i want to
get tested every day i'm willing to
prick my finger take blood do whatever
because i had really sort of light
symptoms um i don't know maybe a week
and a half ago
and if i could have tested myself then i
would have for sure are we at that point
now where um you guys are able to mass
produce
this yeah so the answer is uh
mostly yes
um
there are three types of tests there's
the one i just described which is the
most accurate
uh but it's also the
most expensive um it requires you to
donate some blood and give it to a
hospital you can't do that at home
unless you have a dna sequencing machine
which you would send back
probably uh a few hundred thousand
dollars so no most people don't have
that yet that's that's one there are two
other types one is
the one that you always hear about it's
called a pcr test it's the one that they
they use throughout the world
and that requires a box like that which
is maybe five thousand dollars and what
that's doing is amplifying up
the virus
uh the dn the rna in the virus
to take five copies and make it five
million
uh and then they can read that and uh
get a rough estimate of how much virus
you have in your blood the problem with
that test though is it doesn't detect
mutants right if it's changing you'll
actually miss that
and then there's a middle test which i
haven't talked about yet that's what you
can do at home
um i think the the fda discourages it i
don't think it's yet banned and what
that is it's similar to the way a
pregnancy test works you put a drop of
blood in a little hole
and uh you wait until you get if you get
two bands
you've probably got antibodies against
the virus
why would they ever ban that
uh well i i hope they don't i mean
often what happens is
uh you don't want people making medical
decisions
uh without any guidance from a doctor
uh and remember originally these dna
tests from 23andme were also uh
stopped because doctors don't like
people doing medicine in their in their
homes so one thing i've heard you talk
about pretty powerfully um you were the
first person that gave me a vision of
what
um being prepared truly is
what is your vision for real
preparedness because this i think
people's analysis of this being sort of
a dry run in that it's it's horrible for
sure but it doesn't have a 30 mortality
rate like it could
um so what does truly being prepared for
that pandemic look like
oh
yeah well we've got to prevent this kind
of thing from happening
it's just too expensive so what we need
to do is to have
what i've called the bio force similar
to the air force navy an army
a group that is highly trained and
coordinates with the other military
forces
that is number one the second is
have
whole armies of researchers ready to go
with new technologies for vaccines
because that needs to go much quicker
next time
uh and then third i would have a global
surveillance of viruses both in the
animal world and in humans um including
perhaps anonymously detecting
temperature variations i saw a really
interesting company that's got a
bluetooth thermometer and they can they
can see where the outbreak is coming
just based on
yeah so that's the future you we don't
want to be blind to this i mean doing
tests
on people physically is a huge
waste of uh
well it's a waste of time right
literally because if we knew immediately
when someone had a fever in real time
that would be the way to go so i think
that's the next generation of what we
have to do
yeah that that to me starts to get
really interesting when i first heard
you talk about the bio force i was like
whoa
that actually makes a lot of sense we've
got the air force we've got the navy um
in preparation for times of war right
you don't try to generate the air force
once you've been attacked
so
that to me is is really interesting you
said at the top though that this is too
expensive um
do you think that people's mentality is
going to shift from this
yeah it has to
i mean the world cannot afford to do
this on a regular basis
um
you know how many trillions of dollars
are we talking about no one's even
putting a number on this yet it's too
big to even
speculate um for much less you could do
what i just said
and that would prevent the next pandemic
you know and also you can you can
prevent environmental disturbances
the uh one of the main reasons we're
seeing these viruses come out of the
natural world
is that we push too far into nature
and we need to try and allow
this some distance between wild animals
and humans
that's interesting how would you ever do
that like how would you create a dmz
between us and animals because either
we're going to go up to the edge of
their territory or they're going to come
to the edge of ours like there are
coyotes in manhattan
so it's like if kaido is like [__] it
we're just going to roll up uh into one
of the most densely populated cities on
the planet i imagine like if we say okay
we're gonna retreat right that the the
animals are just gonna come right up to
that edge and then if we retreat more
they'll they'll come into our space
again so um how do you really create a
dmz
right well
i suppose you could say the cat's
already out of the bag but we've got to
do something um the first thing you can
do is monitor the the
environment that's what i'm suggesting
the second is what china did which is
ban the harvesting of these wild animals
in the first place we've got to stop
that across the planet it's not just
china there's other parts of the world
where that where they
routinely go into forests and kill
animals i was in
africa this year and was actually
it was quite heartwarming to see that
they've stopped uh the slaughter of
gorillas but
they were very nearly wiped out it is
possible and what you need to do and
using that as an example in uganda is
give incentives for the locals to earn
money from the wild animals
in a national park so you you put a
boundary you have armed guards who
patrol
that spot or across the boundary
and you shoot people that that actually
disobey it's what they do for the
gorillas and it's working really well
um but there's a tourist trade so when
tourism gets back up we've got to
encourage people to go to places of as
tourists not uh to go buy ivory and meat
and this kind of crazy stuff
that's uh you know it's a simple
uh
answer to a very complex problem and i'm
sure it's not going to be easy
but we have to do something because we
just can't go through this routinely
you know so you when you were talking
earlier about things starting in animals
and coming to humans it does beg the
question what is starting in humans like
if animals and we are just another
animal so if animals are out in the wild
incubating things what is it that humans
are incubating right now
most of the the pathogens that we get
are
direct from humans unfortunately they
don't mutate that fast
so measles is still around with us
because it doesn't mutate itself to
death like these viruses tend to do
um that's whoa whoa stop there so um
you're saying that oftentimes mutations
are self-destructive yes
interesting
interesting okay so that's
that's a bit of
an optimistic way to look at so it's
possible that covid19 which i guess
technically is the disease the
coronavirus
is going to
it could because it mutates so fast
actually cause a problem for itself
without a doubt most of these changes
are going to be
negative for the virus
but it's evolved to be highly
mutated because on mutagenic it changes
its genes all the time for a very good
reason
because if you just get stuck with one
species like measles has
if your species goes extinct you're
screwed
right
so the coronaviruses have been around
for forever essentially you know half a
billion years because they can get out
of their heart species and spread
through the animal kingdom very clever
right so but the way to do that is to
constantly be changing and roll the dice
and jump across
and that goes back to this what i've
heard referred to as a lock-in key and
that's the spike that you're talking
about like what is that process
yeah well it does two things one is it
it knocks on the door and then the cell
lets it in stupidly but it does and the
other way to do that is to bind so
tightly
that it's like two bubbles hitting each
other and then they merge right so those
are the two ways but you're exactly
right the the spike protein is a key and
the lock that it engages
is called ace2 ace2 which is
no coincidence
found on the airways uh the exposed
surfaces of our body
that's a that's by quote-unquote design
the virus has found a weakness there's
another protein called dpp4 which mers
binds to another cell surface protein
so these viruses are very clever they've
honed in on these
proteins that are found in abundance in
the throat and in the nose
so one thing that i found interesting
about viruses because of course the
first question when you start to hear
okay it's hijacking the cell
um
why why is it that it always makes us do
bad things to spread you know it cough
you feel terrible
but the reality is there actually are a
gaggle of viruses that are in certainly
our digestive tract i would assume there
are some in the mouth probably the nose
the vagina um anywhere where we have
like an ecosystem um
that actually are beneficial do are
there some examples of viruses that are
working for us why do we need them how
do they help
uh well there are thousands of viruses
out there
so they're all over us they're on our
skin like you say they're in the gut
um
as far as i know they're not helping us
that much um it's the bacteria are
definitely helpful because they
metabolize things and they digest our
food
and they even keep the dangerous
bacteria off our skin
but i think viruses
as i understand it are mostly just
hitchhikers and don't do us harm
it's only very rare ones like this one
that actually
uh end up killing us
um so i would be remiss not to ask while
we have you
what should people be doing to protect
themselves um to you know maximize the
strength of their immunity
to stay safe in this time other
obviously than physical distancing
right so the first thing i would say is
if you smoke stop immediately that's
number one
hopefully
all your viewers and listeners don't
smoke
but that's that's the biggest risk you
can inflict on your body in the in the
covert 19 era is to be a smoker
but you can actually recover pretty
quickly if you stop
so now would be the time
for those of you who those of us who are
not smokers you still can optimize your
body
you want to do some aerobics as it's
called or high-intensity interval
training if you're just in an apartment
you can still do what are they jumping
jacks tom what what are we calling star
jumps
that's the minimum get your heart moving
you probably have noticed i'm actually
standing up for this interview
i really try to avoid sitting down
because you know i'm burning calories
i'm getting more flexible my body is
much better off than sitting when i
wrote my book for two years uh i i could
barely walk after that my muscles were
so degraded in my hips so that brings
another point you want to be doing
flexibility and hip hinge exercises in
general um especially as you get older
uh but specifically for the virus
um you don't want to be low in iron so
if you typically have some anemia make
sure you're not anemic because you need
your blood to be able to bring oxygen
levels up
um i would
focus on vitamin d
now there's really good evidence from
studies
and doctor's advice that vitamin d will
keep your immune system in tip-top shape
so i'm taking
two and a half thousand
units a day of that and so is my family
i eat i still eat less often than most
people i'm still skipping breakfast i
think a little bit of fasting during the
day
can only have benefits for your immune
system as long as you don't overdo it
and stop eating for a whole week
um
i'm also um trying to keep my blood
sugar levels low
um you know not too low that i'm passing
out but what
some chinese scientists have published
is that the virus can also attack red
blood cells
where you have iron of course carries
oxygen
and it's also thought that
you can damage your
red blood cells the hemoglobin by having
too much sugar and in fact if you have a
lot of blood
so when you get a test for type 2
diabetes what they're measuring
is a thing called
hba1c and the hb stands for hemoglobin
and the it's basically sugars attached
to your hemoglobin which have been
speculated to make your blood red blood
cells more susceptible to the virus
so in abundance of caution and
if you have type 2 diabetes
it certainly can hurt you and will
probably help you
to eat less often during the day
i still have really great dinners i eat
normally and i have a glass of red wine
typically with dinner so i'm not always
eating carrots
so i'm with you you've got to live a
little in life
but now would be the time to get into
shape
i do focus on plants i try to eat plants
that have
certain nutrients a lot of nutrients
there are molecules i don't know if tom
if you've heard of xenohermesis before
it's a long word i'm very familiar with
hormesis i don't know the difference
between xenohormesis and oremesis though
well you can blame me because because i
co-invented that name xeno just means
between species
and so what that means is
if you stress your food they're going to
make molecules that give you a health
benefit
instead of you having to physically
stress your own body by diet and
exercise and so colored foods if you've
got really deep
dark blue blueberries or
kale these are the foods that especially
if they've been plucked when they're
dehydrated or exposed to too much sun
we'll have a lot more of these plant
defense molecules that actually activate
our own defenses we've shown over the
last 20 years so try to do that it's
very hard though when we don't have a
lot of fresh food at home
yeah i was just going to say peter tia
gave advice that basically assume every
bit of food that comes into your house
has the virus on it and so if you can't
scrub it was his words
then you probably should need it so i've
given up blueberries strawberries um
which makes me very sad because i eat
blueberries almost every day
i've traded it in for bananas and apples
apples obviously you can wash with soap
and water bananas have their own skin
just don't [__] eat it um
where do you come down on that do you
think that it would survive on berries
is water enough to burst the bubble of
the virus or do you actually need soap
uh so i have a procedure
i leave it out of the fridge
for about a day
and then and then it should be good to
go i haven't worried that much about the
food
i think we have to
worry much more about pushing buttons on
elevators and touching surfaces in
public spaces that's where you're going
to get it probably
one area
uh
i want to tell you about is humidity
because this was a surprise to me
so i always thought that humidity was
bad for viruses or bad bad for catching
colds put it that way
and i always imagine that when you
breathe out those little droplets that
you can catch if it's nice and dry
they'll evaporate and poof they're dead
but i researched this and then talked to
some experts over in europe and they
said that's dead wrong actually that
that what you want in your household
environment
is
really good in humidity which is about
45 to 50 relative humidity which you
typically don't have in winter or a
typical house is about 24 25
in the us
yeah
so why is that well some of the studies
go back many years what they show is if
you take
i think it was guinea pigs
and flow virus through guinea pigs and
guinea pigs are a very good model for
human airways
if the humidity is at the middle range
that i mentioned they didn't catch it
typically and if it was really dry or
really really wet like above 60
that's when they caught it and then
other studies that i thought were really
convincing is if you look at schools
depending on the humidity of the school
the virus spreads
faster or slower so i'm now
convinced based on the evidence that
high humidity or at least making sure
it's not too low is a good thing so i
recommend
people buy humidifiers for their bedroom
if they have a very dry climate
and is that because it's keeping the
mucus layer intact
exactly because this mucous layer it'll
trap the virus and actually we have
enzymes in our body that that can
destroy viruses if they get trapped in
the mucus but if the mucous level or the
layer that's on our throats and in our
lungs is really crispy and dry
then that won't work
whoo
well this stuff definitely gets
complicated all right so you gave us a
lot of cool things we can do
if you were going to make one
recommendation you're only going to make
one change to improve your health in
this time
what
change would you have people make
move
in one word
just move because the the reason most
people
are very sick
go on a ventilator
and even die is a lack of oxygen so if
you move you'll you'll actually grow new
blood vessels in your muscle
you'll have more red blood cells in your
body
um you'll be fitter and you'll have a
greater chance of getting through this
without such strong symptoms
love that
dude where can people connect with you
where are you putting out this amazing
information that i've seen coming out of
your world
uh so i put out newsletters i put most
of the information that we talked about
today
in these newsletters that are found on a
website called
lifespanbook.com and you just
sign up there and you get the old
versions of the newsletter actually
they're not that old then they came out
in the last 48 hours
and the previous versions as well so
your lifespanbook.com and on social
media like you are
thank you man i appreciate that very
much and thank you for helping people
separate the fact from fiction get the
information that they need keep them
healthy um i am very excited to see the
world return to normal so we can keep
talking about anti-aging stuff but this
was really really incredible david i
can't thank you enough for your time man
much appreciated hey thanks tom good to
see you take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you